
--- Page 1 ---
CS445 - Natural Language Processing
Spring 2026
Instructor: Dilara Kek¨ ull¨ uo˘ glu Email: dilara.kekulluoglu@sabanciuniv.edu
Time: M 12:40 - 14:30, W 16:40 - 17:30 Place: FENS L045
TAs: TBA
Office Hours:
Dilara Kek¨ ull¨ uo˘ glu Wednesday 10:00-11:00 FENS 1089
You can also come visit the instructor in their office by appointment through email. Please add CS445
in the subject in your emails so we do not miss them.
Main Reference: Daniel Jurafsky and James H. Martin, Speech and Language Processing: An Introduction
to Natural Language Processing, Computational Linguistics, and Speech Recognition (3rd edition online).
https://web.stanford.edu/~jurafsky/slp3/
Optional Reference: Steven Bird, Ewan Klein, and Edward Loper, Natural Language Processing with
Python. https://www.nltk.org/book/
Contents: This course studies the theory, design, and implementation of natural language processing
systems. Topics include text processing, regular expressions, statistical properties of text, edit distance, lan-
guage modeling, text classification, sequence modeling, topic modeling, computational morphology, neural
networks for NLP, chatbots, and transfer learning for NLP.
Learning Objectives: This course aims to give foundational knowledge of the Natural Language Processing
field. A student who successfully fulfills the course requirements will be able to:
1. describe the statistical properties of text in natural language.
2. implement programs that can process textual data and extract valuable information from it.
3. apply well-known language processing techniques to text.
4. explain the significance and principles of language modeling.
5. develop machine learning models to classify documents, sub-documents, or terms.
6. assess the quality of natural language processing models applied to text.
Prerequisites: CS 204 and (CS 210 or DSA 210)
page 1 of 3

--- Page 2 ---
CS445 Natural Language Processing
Course Outline:
• Week 1: Introduction to Natural Language Processing
• Week 2: Regular Expressions and Text Normalization
• Week 3: Text Analysis
• Week 4: Language Models
• Week 5: Text Classifications and Neural Networks
• Week 6: Semantics and Embeddings
• Week 7: Midterm I (Tentative)
• Week 8: Morphology, POS Tagging, and Named Entities
• Week 9: Hidden Markov Models
• Week 10: Context-Free Grammars and Parsing
• Week 11: Large Language Models
• Week 12: Conversational Agents
• Week 13: Midterm II (Tentative)
• Week 14: NLP as a tool in Current Research
Grading Policy: Coding Assignments (15%), Midterms(60%), Project (25%).
Important Dates: These dates are tentative and subject to change. We will notify you of the exact dates
for the midterm exams.
Midterm I . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Week 7
Midterm II . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Week 13
Project Deadline . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Week 14
Class Policy:
• Regular attendance is essential and expected. Attendance will be taken but will not count towards
your final grade.
• You have three points you can use for late submissions. Every day you are late for a coding assignment
will remove a point from your balance. You can use these three points as you wish for the coding
assignments. If you do not have any points left, you will receive zero marks for missed deadlines.
• Late submissions are not accepted for the project deadlines.
• Midterms will include all topics covered in class up to the exam date.
• We will have only one makeup exam, which may count only for one of the midterm exams. Missing
both of the midterms will result in an automatic fail.
Grading:
• Written exams, coding assignments, and the projects will be counted for the last letter grade.
page 2 of 3

--- Page 3 ---
CS445 Natural Language Processing
• Letter grades will be assigned based on the curve, considering the distribution of the grades in the
class. If the class average is too high, we can apply catalogue grades.
• Any one of the following leads to failing the course automatically: (1) overall total grade below 40
(over 100), (2) any exam grade below 30 (over 100), (3) missing both of the midterm exams. However,
not having an automatic fail does not guarantee you will pass the course (e.g., you may still fail with
a total grade over 40, depending on the course grade distribution).
Extra Credits from Research Participation - up to 3 points
Students can convert their SONA research points into bonus points for this course. You can collect
SONA points by participating in research conducted by Sabanci University researchers. You will be able to
sign up for experiments and earn your Research Points through the online Sona at https://sabanciuniv.
sona-systems.com/ The system details can be found in Research Points - GuideForStudents Spring 2026.pdf
on SUCourse.
You may convert up to 6 SONA points into 3 course points. If you use SONA credits for a bonus, you
cannot participate in other bonus assignments we might have in the course (there may be at most one with
potential for three points). However, we may also have no additional bonus assignments.
Generative AI Policy
Students may use AI tools under specific conditions. For assignments and group projects, you are not
allowed to write the code from scratch with an AI tool. You may use AI tools to give you suggestions for
functionalities you want and to debug your code, like you would use Google Search (e.g., what library to use
for spellchecking, how to fix XXX error). However, you should not generate the entirety of the code with an
AI tool (e.g., write an intent detection system for me). You are responsible for your own submissions. Please
double-check and test the suggestions provided by the AI tool to ensure they are working correctly. For the
project reports, AI tools may only be used for editing purposes (e.g., grammar and clarity). Generating
content, such as writing sections of the report, structuring arguments, or producing analysis with AI, is not
permitted. No distinction is made between different AI platforms; all tools are treated equally under this
policy. You are allowed to upload course materials to AI tools for studying, but do not upload the course
materials online publicly.
This approach is intended to support students’ learning and writing skills while ensuring that the core
analytical and conceptual work in the term project reflects their own understanding. For any questions
about the AI policy, students should contact the course instructor directly via email or during office hours.
In addition, students should be informed of the “Guidelines on the Use of Generative AI”, which outlines
Sabancı University’s general approach to the use of AI in education.
Academic Honesty: All students must follow the university guidelines of academic integrity. https:
//www.sabanciuniv.edu/en/academic-integrity-statement
Flexibility: The contents of the syllabus are subject to change. The students will be notified of any
updates.
page 3 of 3