
--- Page 1 ---
CS 411/507 - Cryptography*
Fall 2025 - 2026
Instructor Information
Name:Erkay Sava¸ s
Office:FENS 2037
Email:erkays@sabanciuniv.edu
Office Hours:Wednesday 16:40-18:30 (FENS 2037)
Schedule
Lectures:Wednesday 18:40 - 19:30 FMAN G071
Thursday 17:40 - 19:30 FMAN G071
This is a three-credit introductory course on the methods, algorithms, techniques, and tools of data
security and cryptography . After studying the theoretical aspects of cryptographic algorithms and
protocols, we show how these techniques can be integrated to solve particular data and communi-
cation security problems. This course material is of use to computer and communication engineers
who are interested in embedding security into an information system, and thus, providing integrity ,
confidentiality , and authenticity of the documents and the communicating parties.
Catalogue Data
This is an introductory course on cryptography . Topics include: Classical cryptosystems, basics of
number theory , symmetric key cryptography (stream and block ciphers), hash functions, public key
cryptosystems (RSA, discrete logarithm based algorithms, and elliptic curve cryptography (ECC)),
digital signatures, implementation issues, secure key establishment techniques, secret sharing, and
zero-knowledge proof.
Prerequisite
CS 411 is open to any undergraduate students, who have previously taken MATH 204 – Discrete
Mathematics - and scored minimum grade of D. Additionally , some experience in Python program-
ming language is required.
CS 507 is open to graduate students. There is no prerequisite for CS 507.
Tentative Outline
•Introduction and Classical Cryptosystems:Secure communication. Attacks to cryptosys-
tems. Classical cryptographic techniques and algorithms. One-time pad, randomness and
pseudo-randomness
•Mathematical Foundations:Number theory . Finite fields. Primitive roots. Exponentiation
and discrete logarithm.
*All information in this document is tentative. The instructors reserve the right to make changes in the semester.

--- Page 2 ---
•Secret-Key Cryptography:Block ciphers and stream ciphers. DES, AES (Rijndael). Modes of
operation.
•Public-Key Cryptography:One-way functions. Trapdoor one-way functions. Public-key cryp-
tosystems. RSA, Diffie-Hellman, ElGamal, and elliptic curve cryptosystems.
•Authentication and Digital Signatures:Hash functions and message-digest functions. Digi-
tal signatures. Authentication protocols, forward secrecy , plausible deniability .
•Protocols:Secret Sharing Schemes, Zero-knowledge proof systems. Key management archi-
tectures, Public Key Infrastructure.
Textbook
Nigel P. Smart. Cryptography Made Simple. Springer, 2016. ISBN 978-3-319-21936-3
References
W. Trappe and Lawrence C. Washington, Introduction to Cryptography with Coding Theory . 2 nd
Edition , Prentice Hall, 2006.
C. Paar and J. Pelzl, Understanding Cryptography, Springer 2010
A. J. Menezes P. C. van Oorschot, and S. A Vanstone. Handbook of Applied Cryptography , CRC
Press, 1997.
D. R. Stinson, Cryptography: Theory and Practice, 3rd Edition, Chapman Hall/CRC, 2006.
Student Responsibilities
•Exams:Students are required to comply with instructor’s rules for exams (quizzes, midterm,
and final)
•Homework assignments:There will be about four homework assignments. You will be
required to write programs in Python programming language.
•Term project:Students are required to work on a term project. It is essential for stu-
dents to meet time schedule of the projects. Project groups must provide a demonstra-
tion/presentation of their work. During the demonstration/presentation, all the project mem-
bers must be present. Students may work in groups of two.
Tentative Grading
• Midterm Exam 30%
• Final Exam 40 %
• Term Project 15%
• Homeworks (Total 4(±1)) 15%
The letter grade boundaries will be determined by the instructors at the end of the term. In
order to pass the course, the overall grade has to be higher than D/F boundry and the final exam
grade has to be higher than 25/100.
Exams will be held in-person.
2 of 3

--- Page 3 ---
Exam Dates
Midterm:TBA (possibly 8 th or 9th week of the term)
Final:will be scheduled by SR
Make-up Policy
• There will be no make-up for homeworks, and term project. Students automatically get 0
(zero) from the respective assignment grade if any of them is missed.
• Make-up is only allowed for the midterm and final examinations to those with an official
medical report and to those with an official permission notice from the university on the date
of the exam in question.
• Make-up examinations may be written and/or oral.
Time Conflict Permission Policy
In general, time conflict permission requests are approved in this course 1. However, time con-
flict permission is not a permission for you not to attend some classes. Moreover, it does not mean
that, time conflicts will be taken into account when planning any activity (exam, quiz, etc.) for the
corresponding hour. It is the responsibility of the student, who took time conflict permission, to
manage potential problems that may arise due to time conflict.
It is assumed that the students, who are registered to this course with time conflict permission,
accept these terms.
Plagiarism Policy (Academic Integrity)
Plagiarism means presenting someone else’s work as yours. This is a very serious and ethical
problem. A plagiarized work may or may not be a verbatim copy of another submission. Verbatim
copies are of course plagiarized ones. However, if a submission is derived from another one by
partially changing or rephrasing some parts, this action is also plagiarism. When a plagiarism case
is detected, sanctions are applied to all parties regardless of the actual source of the submission.
These sanctions are as follows:
• For the midterm/final examinations,
– students directly fail the course, even in the first offense. 2
• For the homeworks and term project,
– for the first time, all plagiarized submission owners receive 0,
– the second time, the student fails the course automatically .3
1The instructors reserve the right to reject any request.
2 Additionally , the case will be referred to the FENS Dean’s Office for disciplinary action. This course does not tolerate
any breach of academic integrity (more info on https://www.sabanciuniv.edu/en/academic-integrity-statement)
3See footnote 2
3 of 3