
--- Page 1 ---
DSA 440/CS540 - Data and Artificial Intelligence (AI) Ethics
Spring 2026
Instructor: Dilara Kek¨ ull¨ uo˘ glu Email: dilara.kekulluoglu@sabanciuniv.edu
Time: M 10:40-12:30, W 15:40-16:30 Place: M FENS L045, W UC G030 (Cinema Hall)
TAs: TBD
Office Hours:
Dilara Kek¨ ull¨ uo˘ glu Wednesday 10:00-11:00 FENS 1089
You can also come visit the instructor in their office by appointment through email. Please add
DSA440/CS540 in the subject in your emails so we do not miss them.
Main Reference: No main reference. There will be open-access articles and tools as references, shared
every week.
Contents: Artificial Intelligence systems have become increasingly involved in our lives. These systems
can be used in relatively low-stakes decision making such as recommender systems but they are also used
in medical contexts too. More recently, the wider public utilize generative AI tools such as ChatGPT and
Midjourney to write documents, reports, and emails, or create pictures, and logos to use in various ways.
All of these introduce ethical challenges with implications for data ethics, privacy, bias, sustainability, and
so on. This course will introduce the ethical implications of artificial intelligence to the students. We will
also discuss our role in this and how to take steps to minimize harm as people working with big data and
AI (e.g. future researchers, software engineers, or analysts).
Learning Objectives: This course aims to give an introduction to artificial intelligence ethics. A student
who successfully fulfills the course requirements will be able to:
1. describe ethical issues surrounding collection and use of data
2. explain concepts around AI ethics such as fairness, accountability, transparency, privacy, and sus-
tainability.
3. assess AI systems according to the ethical AI principles
4. design AI systems with ethical AI principles in mind
page 1 of 3

--- Page 2 ---
DSA440/CS540 Artificial Intelligence Ethics
Course Outline: We will discuss the following topics in the course.
• Introduction to Artificial Intelligence and Its Use
• Data Ethics
• Big Data and Large AI Models
• Privacy
• Bias in AI Systems
• Fairness, Accountability, and Transparency
• Explainability, Contestability, and Answerability
• Human Oversight on AI
• Applied AI Ethics
• AI Use in High-Stake Domains (Healthcare, Government, Education)
• AI in Business
• AI Policies and Governance around the World
• Sustainability and Impact on Environment
Grading Policy: Active Participation (15%), Take-Home Assignments (20%), Group Project (25%),
Midterm Exam (40%).
Important Dates: These dates are tentative and subject to change. We will notify you of the exact dates
for the midterm exam.
Midterm . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Week 10
Project Deadline . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Week 14
Class Policy:
• Regular attendance is essential and expected. Attendance will be taken but will not count towards
your final grade. Active participation will be measured by TopHat questions and case study exercises
in-class.
• Reading list will be provided for each week. I expect that essential reading will be done before coming
to the lecture. Discussion will be based on these readings. Midterm will have questions from the
readings.
• You have three points you can use for late submissions. Every day you are late for an assignment
will remove a point from your balance. You can use these three points as you wish for the take-home
assignments. If you do not have any points left, you will receive zero marks for missed deadlines.
• Late submissions are not accepted for the project deadlines.
Grading:
• Midterm exam, take-home assignments, active participation, and the group project will be counted
for the last letter grade.
page 2 of 3

--- Page 3 ---
DSA440/CS540 Artificial Intelligence Ethics
• Letter grades will be assigned based on the curve, considering the distribution of the grades in the
class. If the class average is too high, we can apply catalogue grades.
• Any one of the following leads to failing the course automatically: (1) overall total grade below 40
(over 100), (2) any exam grade below 30 (over 100). However, satisfying these conditions does not
guarantee you will pass the course (e.g., you may still fail with a total grade over 40, depending on
the course grade distribution).
Generative AI Policy
Students may use AI tools under specific conditions. For assignments and group projects, you are not
allowed to write the code from scratch with an AI tool. You may use AI tools to give you suggestions for
functionalities you want and to debug your code, like you would use Google Search (e.g., what library to use
for spellchecking, how to fix XXX error). However, you should not generate the entirety of the code with an
AI tool (e.g., write an intent detection system for me). You are responsible for your own submissions. Please
double-check and test the suggestions provided by the AI tool to ensure they are working correctly. For the
project reports, AI tools may only be used for editing purposes (e.g., grammar and clarity). Generating
content, such as writing sections of the report, structuring arguments, or producing analysis with AI, is not
permitted. No distinction is made between different AI platforms; all tools are treated equally under this
policy. You are allowed to upload course materials to AI tools for studying, but do not upload the course
materials online publicly.
This approach is intended to support students’ learning and writing skills while ensuring that the core
analytical and conceptual work in the term project reflects their own understanding. For any questions
about the AI policy, students should contact the course instructor directly via email or during office hours.
In addition, students should be informed of the “Guidelines on the Use of Generative AI”, which outlines
Sabancı University’s general approach to the use of AI in education.
Academic Honesty: All students must follow the university guidelines of academic integrity. https:
//www.sabanciuniv.edu/en/academic-integrity-statement
Flexibility: The contents of the syllabus are subject to change. The students will be notified when there
is an update.
page 3 of 3