
--- Page 1 ---
CS 204 – Advanced Programming – Spring 2026 
3 credits 
 
Prerequisite  CS201. Although formally the grade D is prerequisite, those who got C+ or less are recommended 
to repeat CS201 and then take CS204, because the level of C+  or less in CS201 does not give enough background 
to succeed in CS204. 
Description and objectives 
This course aims to provide programming experience and to give advanced programming techniques. In 
this way, students would be more prepared to data structures and several other junior and senior level CS courses. 
CS204 is a prerequisite course for several  CS courses including data structures. Thus , it is a must course for CS 
students and students who will take advanced CS courses.  
CS204 heavily depends on CS201. Thus a very good CS201 background is needed. We will NOT make a 
review of CS201 topics.  
The programming language that will be used in this course is C++; we will use CLion over Windows  
operating system as the development environment . You have to open a student account 
https://www.jetbrains.com/clion/ using your sabanciuniv emails in order to activate free student license of CLion.  
More details about the development environment will be given later in this syllabus.   
Topics planned to be covered 
 Introduction (overview of basic concepts, C++ environment , preprocessor directives, compiler, compiler 
options, linker, libraries, debugging) 
 Pointers and dynamic memory allocation 
 Linked lists 
 Stacks and queues 
 Advanced issues on classes and object oriented programming 
 Templates, templated  classes and functions 
 Data representation, bitwise operations 
 Inheritance, polymorphism and advanced object oriented design 
 Exception handling 
 Programming with threads 
 Visual programming and graphical user interfaces (if time and scheduling permits) 
 
Instructor 
Albert Levi, FENS 1091, ext. 9563, levi@sabanciuniv.edu  
Office Hours: whenever I am in my office (generally  I am in my office ). Whenever you have a question you can 
drop by or write me. 
 
Assistants: Detailed assistant information (office hours , etc.) will be available at SUCourse . All office hours are 
planned to be held online. See the details at SUCourse.  
Textbook(s) 
Main texts are   "Ivor Horton's Beginning Visual C++ 2012", by Ivor Horton, ISBN: 978-1-118-36808-4.  
Actually any version of this book is OK, I said 2012 since it can be found 
electronically. Although this book says "Visual C++", it is general enough.  
"A Computer Science Tapestry" (CS201 book) 
Reference books are   "Starting out with C++ Early Objects", 7th edition, by T. Gaddis, J. Walters, G. Muganda 
 "Objects, Abstraction, Data Structures and Design using C++" by Koffman and Wolfgang. 
 
We may not stick to the textbooks; you are responsible material covered in class too. Thus it is very 
important to attend to lectures. Moreover, most students do not need books in this course. 
 
Schedule 
Lectures: Monday 16:40-18:30 FENS G077 (auditorium), Wednesday 12:40-13:30 FMAN G071 (auditorium).   
Labs: Sections A1, A2 , A3: Thursday 12:40 – 14:30,        B1, B2 , B3 : Friday 10:40 – 12:30,          
C1, C2, C3: Friday 15:40  – 17:30.           
 
All labs will be held physically and will start this week. Lab TAs are/will be listed at SUCourse. Some lab sections 
might be closed, stay tuned.

--- Page 2 ---
Homework Assignments 
There will be 6 programming homework assignments. There will be no late submissions . You must submit your 
own work! No group works! No direct help from any online or AI source is allowed. All of these acts will be 
considered as plagiarism. Collaboration will not be considered as an excuse for plagiarism!  
 
See below sections for homework grading and submission related issues. 
 
Grading and Exams (absolutely tentative) 
2 Midterm Exams (25% each): Midterm 1: April 6, 2026, Monday, 16:40 – 18:30.  
                                        Midterm 2: May 9, 2026, Saturday,  13:00 – 15:00. 
Final (40%): will be scheduled by student resources. 
Current plan is to have two Midterm exams and one Final exam. In case of changing plans to have  a single  
Midterm Exams, total of exams (90%) will remain intact but the distribution will change.  
No handheld electronic devices (phones, tablets, smart watches) are allowed in the exam rooms. They have to be 
left outside. Moreover, you are not allowed to wear any type of watches during the exam. Any violation of these 
rules will be considered as attempt to cheating.  
 
Homework assignments (10%) –  The homework assignments are of equal weight. All of them will be considered 
in grading. Although I plan to assign 6 homework assignments, the last one may not be graded; I will decide on the 
fate of the last homework towards the end of the semester. Homework grading will mostly be based on correctness 
of the execution; not based on how big is the mistake or how hard you work for it . Thus please test your code very 
carefully. No debugging will be done during grading  and we will not try to understand where the problem is . No 
code/file changes are allowed after the submission. If you submit wrong file, we cannot grade your work. If you 
have mistyped even a single character that causes a compilation error , we cannot do anything. Even if you find out 
your mistake later, we do not allow code changes. See below sections for more abo ut homework grading and 
submission. 
 
Attendance ( -2%): We will take attendance in both lectures and labs (starting after add -drop period) . 70% 
attendance is required. Those who do not meet this threshold will be proportionally penalized up to 2%. No medical 
reports or other excuses will be considered as extra right for non -attendance; they are to be considered within 30% 
of right to not attend.  
 
Use of SUCourse and Communications 
We will make announcements via SUCourse  that you will also receive as emails. Some announcements may be 
sent as plain email or the quick ones via WhatsApp group.  
 
I will start a particular SUCourse announcement for you to ask general questions to the class and to me.  
 
All lecture materials, homework and assignm ents will be posted at SUCourse . The submissions will also be there 
unless otherwise stated.  
 
Lecture materials will be posted as PowerPoint file without annotations made in class. Sample codes discussed in 
class will also be shared. Weekly postings will be done after the lectures (Wednesdays or Thursdays). 
 
Other Rules and Remarks 
- The highest grade you can get from an individual homework assignment is 1. 4 times of your weighted exam 
average. For example, if your weighted exam average (Midterm s and Final) is 71.43% or more, then you may 
get up to 100 from any of the homework assignme nts. As another example, if your weighted exam average is 
40%, then maximum of each homework is 56 even if you get more than that during grading. We will grade the 
homework assignments first without considering this, but at the end of the semester, after f inal exam is 
announced, we will apply the reductions.  
- Students are expected to attend all classes, recitations/labs. In CS204 you will continue to learn a programming 
language and it is much easier to learn a programming language when a person explains it. You have to spend 
more time to compensate a missed class. So absenteeism does not buy time. 
- Students are responsible for the material covered in class even if it is not part of the lecture notes published on 
the website (Sometimes we explain some stuff by writing). That is why attendance is important. 
- Use of online sources (such as YouTube videos, code repositories, programming sites, ChatGPT, Gemini, 
Claude, etc.) is not recommended since they may lead you some materials/methods that are not taught (thus not 
allowed) and are not permitted. Moreover, using such resources may end up plagiarism in homework

--- Page 3 ---
assignments. An exception to this recommendation would be using online help to find the reason of an error 
message, but be careful about the issues mentioned above. Moreover, all recommendations that you find online 
must be applied with proper understanding. Solving a problem, writing a code without understanding the 
reasons and mechanisms behind them is nothing but pure self-deception and does not lead you to success.  
- Students are responsible to check their email s (Sabanci University accounts) and  SUCourse daily for any 
announcements related to this course.  
 
Homework Submission and Grading Policy of CS 204 
- All homework submissions must be done before the specified deadline.  If you submit on the exact deadline 
time, then you are late. That means if the deadline is 21:00, then the latest second that you can submit is 
20:59:59. 
- Late homework submission is not allowed even with a penalty. 
- Medical reports, or any other excuses (even valid ones) do not add extra time to the homework deadlines. 
- Homework submission must be done only to SUCourse. Email or other type of submissions are not accepted. 
- No modification is allowed after SUCourse closes. Thus, please make sure that you've submitted the correct 
homework. If you submit wrong file or if a crucial file is missing, we cannot grade your homework and you get 
zero (0). Sometimes, the students argue the local computer's system time as a proof of t imely completion of a 
wrongly submitted homework; we cannot accept such local proofs and we cannot accept any file other the ones 
submitted to SUCourse. No exceptions to this rule.  
- We do not allow code changes after SUCourse closes either. We grade whatever you submit to SUCourse. This 
rule holds even if one character change increases your grade from 0 to 100.  
- Homework grading is mostly based on correct execution.  We generate some test data for grading . If your 
homework executes wrongfully against this test data, your grade will be lowered accordingly no matter how 
big is your programming bug and no matter how hard you work for it. Sometimes the bug is too simple, but it 
may cause your program to work tot ally wrong and you may get very low grades. Sometimes, you mistype a 
character that causes some compilation errors. These are too unfortunate but we have nothing to do. In order to 
avoid such cases, please test your program th oroughly before the submission and make sure that the submitted 
version is the most up to date one. And please do not write us to complain about this policy and its outcomes 
within the semester; you know it at the beginning of the semester and you take this course by knowing this 
policy.  
- We do not debug your code during grading to understand where the problem is.  As mentioned in the 
previous bullet, we just test your code and grading is not based on how big your bug is.  
- Use of CodeRunner : We plan to use C odeRunner embedded to SUCourse  for most of the homework 
assignments for functional grading purposes (except the ones that require manual check such as multithreading 
applications). CodeRunner also allows you test the code before the final submission and you get feedback 
about the correctness against some test cases. There will be both visible and hidden test cases in CodeRunner, 
and both will contribute to the functional grade of your homework . You will get feedback for both  visible and 
hidden test cases; but for the hidden test cases, you will not be able to see which parts are wrong. Moreover, we 
will definitely will not disclose details of the hidden test cases.  
- Other grading criteria include modularity of the code, coding style, commenting, efficiency, etc. There might 
be homework-specific rules as well. Thus even you pass all test cases, your grade may be less than 100 if you 
do not follow stylistic and other rules.  
- Testing is your responsibility.  Depending on the suitability of homework, we will provide sample runs, 
together with the homework specification, corresponding to the visible CodeRunner test cases. However, we do 
not guarantee that sample runs / visible CodeRunner test cases cover all of the edge and corner cases. Also 
keep in mind that the hidden test cases will be different than the visible ones and we keep our right to add extra 
test cases after the submissions closes. To sum up , it is your responsibility to test your program against all 
possibilities in order not to lose points due to some bugs. 
- Only course material: You have to use only the material covered in class. In other words, you are not allowed 
to use anything that has not been taught in CS201 and CS204.  Thus, if you use any type of online help, you do 
not only take the risk of plagiarism, but also take the risk of violating this rule.  
- No break and continue: You are not allowed to use break and continue statements.  
- No global: You are not allowed to use global variables unless otherwise stated. 
- Homework grading may be done via a demo during which you may be questioned about your homework. 
- Development platform related issues: 
o Formal development environment of CS204 is CLion over Windows with G++ compiler and C++ 
17 standard (For technical help for installation, please refer to the guides at SUCourse).  We had to 
pick this environment mainly due to two reasons: 1) CodeRunner uses G++, 2) University provides

--- Page 4 ---
Windows computers to professors and TAs. We, as the CS204 team, do not have a particular feeling 
for Mac users! 
o Attention Mac Users:  Default toolchain (compiler, etc.) that comes with MacOS is CLang and it 
might cause some compatibility problems due to undefined behaviors of C++. There is a workaround 
to install G++ on MacOS that we explain in the guides that we post at SUCourse. This is the only help 
that we can provide to Mac users since if it does not work, there is really nothing to do (in some Mac 
configurations this does not work). Thus, if this workaround does not work, the only option for you to 
continue with default Clang compiler. 
o MS Visual Studio has its own compiler and may cause some inconsistencies with G++ of CLion. 
o If you want to use MS Visual Studio, VSCode, Xcode (MacOS), CLion on MacOS with Clang 
compiler, or another platform, I have to say "use at your own risk". That  means, we may not help in 
case of problems. 
o It is not that easy to install any development environment on MacOS that uses G++. We provide some 
guides in SUCourse  in order to help the Mac users to install C Lion with G++ on MacOS , but we 
cannot provide any help during office hours if these guides do not work for your Mac.  
o I know that Mac users prefer to use Xcode, but unfortunately Xcode is extremely problematic when it 
comes to CS204 topics. Xcode is forgiving for programmer mistakes and even if you think that your 
code works, there might be some logical errors in your code that Xcode suppresses. That is why, please 
do not use Xcode.  
o However, even our formal platform (CLion over Windows) may cause some minor compatibility 
issues with CodeRunner due to differences in operating systems (CodeRunner runs on an Ubuntu 2204 
server with G++ compiler). If you want to have zero compatibility issues, you need to use Ubuntu that 
we cannot assume to have for all students (thus cannot make it the formal environment). 
o Those, who have problems such as working locally but not working over CodeRunner, can try 
onlinegdb.com for testing/debugging purposes.  
Rules to submit a medical report to take a make-up exam in CS 204 
- All medical reports must be issued or approved by the health center. Recently the rule of external reports has 
changed; private doctor reports are no longer accepted. Please check out health center for that. Please make 
sure that external medical reports are given to health center on the date of exam. If it is going to be delayed for 
some reason, please let the instructor know about it. 
- If possible, let the instructor know about your medical issue and your unavailability for  the exam before the 
exam. If there is a non-medical reason for missing an exam, this issue must be brought to instructor's attention 
before the exam.  
- Those who will take the makeup exam should apply for it by following the course announcements; We will not 
follow up on the makeup exam takers via the medical reports.  Please do not keep asking the date for the make -
up exam and wait for my announcement about it.  
- If you take regular midterm or final  exam, even if you have a medical report for that day , the exam will be 
considered valid and makeup will not be given.  
- There will be one makeup to cover one of the midterms, and another one to cover the final. You cannot miss 
both of the midterm exams. If you do so, makeup is given only for one of the midterms.  
- There will not be a makeup exam to cover a makeup exam whatsoever. 
- Last, but not the least, make-up exams will be harder than the normal exams for the sake of fairness to those 
who take the exam on time and studied less than the make-up takers. 
CS204 AI Policy in a nutshell 
- Course materials (lecture notes, assignments, sample questions, project spec., etc.) are provided onl y for your 
personal use. They must not be uploaded, shared, or given, wholly or partially, to any AI tool, service, or 
platform. 
- Students may use AI tools only to reinforce their understanding of course topics (e.g., by asking clarifying 
questions or exploring related examples). 
- Assignments, projects, and other graded work must be completed entirely by the student’s own effort. Asking 
AI tools to directly or indirectly solve or generate answers for these tasks will be considered plagiarism. 
- Any violation of  these rules will be treated as an academic integrity issue and will be reported to the dean's 
office for disciplinary investigation.

--- Page 5 ---
Policy on Plagiarism, Homework Trading, Grading of AI generated Codes  
A plagiarized homework may or may not be a verbatim copy of another homework. Verbatim copies are of course 
plagiarized ones. If you use any online tool or code provided by online sources, this is also plagiarism. I f a 
homework is derived from another one by partially changing some parts, this action is also plagiarism. Cooperation 
and working together is not an excuse. A common fallacy is that the graders cannot catch a program that is 
developed by partially changing another program. Believe it or not, such programs are caught very easily. There are 
software products available to catch such cases, and we use them. When a plagiarism case is detected, sanctions are 
applied to all parties regardless of the actual source of the homework. This is simply getting 0. 
AI generated homework assignments are also considered as plagiarized ones. AI generated codes really look alike 
and the plagiarism tools flag them. If you get flagged that way, your homework will get 0.  No appeals will be 
accepted; if you do not want to take the risk of being flagged, then do not use AI for homework assignments. 
If you get 0 two times, then all of the homework grades will be set to 0. 
 
Use of AI tools will also be considered as plagiarism for any grading item. 
Plagiarized assignments will not be graded.  
For the exams, any type of cheating (including having an electronic device 
other than calculator in proximity) will be reported to the Dean's Office for 
disciplinary actions